JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: The war continues.
As Ukrainian forces hold off Russian advances
in the east, a massive effort by Western allies
to arm Ukraine.
Then, 30 years later, Los Angeles reflects
on the uprising that followed the brutal police
beating of Rodney King and its impact on policing.
DARNELL HUNT, Dean of Social Services, UCLA:
All the basic measures of economic well-being
across the different racial and ethnic groups,
there's been very, very little progress since
1992.
And, in some cases, we have gone backwards.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it's Friday.
David Brooks and Jonathan Capehart weigh in
on new polling that shows Democrats losing
ground to Republicans as the parties gear
up for midterm elections.
All that and more on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Desperate attempts to evacuate
the besieged city of Mariupol continue today,
with the United Nations trying to strike a
deal with Russian forces that would allow
more than 100,000 civilians to leave the port
city.
Fighting raged elsewhere in Ukraine's east.
And, in the capital of Kyiv, rescuers took
stock of a deadly missile strike that hit
as the U.N. secretary-general visited last
night.
Special correspondent Willem Marx reports.
WILLEM MARX: In Ukraine's east, the roar of
artillery remains relentless.
Swirls of smoke stain the sky in the city
of Lyman, now a part of the landscape.
At a nearby hospital, Tatiana receives treatment
for her injuries.
She says a missile struck her daughters home.
The two of them survived, but her grandson
did not.
And she buried him with her own hands.
TATIANA MATSEGORA, Lyman, Ukraine Resident
(through translator): It's one thing to bury
a child, but another thing to bury your grandson.
He was only 14 years old.
He asked me: "Grandma, will I live?"
I said that he would live.
But I betrayed him.
I will never forgive myself for it.
WILLEM MARX: To the south, in Mariupol, more
than 100,000 trapped residents unlikely to
forgive their occupiers' onslaught.
Ukraine said today it planned fresh evacuations
from the Azovstal steel plant, the city's
last Ukraine-held redoubt.
Inside the plant, a Ukrainian commander said
he's now hopeful his troops can survive the
siege.
SVIATOSLAV PALAMAR, Deputy Commander, Azov
Regiment (through translator): I really believe
that all the defenders of Mariupol, the troops
that remained here, the wounded and those
alive, that we will be able to save the lives
of these heroes.
I have hope that we will be able to get as
many guys out of here alive.
WILLEM MARX: But there are few signs of life
elsewhere in the city, the local history museum
reduced to rubble.
It survived the Second World War, but now
stands as a grim reminder of Putin's invasion.
The U.S. says the Kremlin seeks to surround
Ukrainian forces in the Donbass region, advancing
north from Mariupol and south from Izyum.
But one senior U.S. defense official today
said they believe that Russian advance is
now days behind schedule.
In Ukraine's capital meanwhile, missiles yesterday
demolished more homes.
LIUDMYLA, Kyiv Resident (through translator):
They killed so many people.
It is really difficult.
WILLEM MARX: Among the remnants, rescue workers
carried out the body of journalist Vira Hyrych.
She worked for the U.S.-funded broadcaster
Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty.
In Irpin, just to Kyiv's northwest, drone
video above block after block of devastation,
once home to 62,000 residents, the former
battlefield now a ghost town after Russian
forces withdrew in late March.
Those missiles in Kyiv, Judy, a reminder these
strikes can still happen anywhere any time
inside Ukraine.
But as our teams experienced firsthand over
the past couple of days, by far, the heaviest
firepower is trained on the country's south
and east.
A couple days ago, two hours' drive southeast
from here in Dnipro, the town we were visiting
was rocked by dozens of explosions each and
every hour.
Today, three hours' drive due east of here,
we met a Ukrainian soldier injured in an artillery
strike who told us it was one of around 100
shells to have darkened the sky over the course
of the day over his single unit -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Willem Marx in Ukraine, we
thank you.
And a reminder.
The "NewsHour"'s coverage of the war in Ukraine
is supported in partnership with the Pulitzer
Center.
With the war raging in Eastern Ukraine, there
is a divide between the war aims declared
by the Russian high command in Moscow and
the reality of the war on the ground.
Amna Nawaz has that.
AMNA NAWAZ: That's right, Judy.
For more on the state of the war in Ukraine,
we turn once again to Dmitri Alperovitch.
he's co-founder of the Silverado Policy Accelerator.
That's a Washington-based think tank.
Dmitri, welcome back to the "NewsHour."
Thanks for joining us.
Let's start with your assessment of that Russian
war effort on the ground.
I spoke earlier with the Pentagon spokesman,
John Kirby.
He said, yes, Russia is learning from earlier
missteps, they are better at resupplying forces
in the field, better at combining their air
and ground capabilities, but their progress
has been slow and uneven.
What's your read on how they're doing?
DMITRI ALPEROVITCH, Co-Founder, Silverado
Policy Accelerator: That's absolutely right.
The reality is that the Russians have learned
from their mistakes, and they're using overwhelming
fires, as we have just heard from the report,
shelling indiscriminately the Ukrainian positions,
killing, of course, many civilians in the
process, but they're still making very little
progress because they're up against very well-armed
Ukrainians now.
They're getting supplies from the West.
They're entrenched in their defensive positions.
And that's making it very, very difficult
for the Russians.
And they're taking heavy casualties.
AMNA NAWAZ: Admiral Kirby also mentioned specifically
the role of conscripts in this case, that
they're sort of being inundated with propaganda
back home about how well the effort is going,
and then they get there on the ground and
find a very different situation.
He says that's contributing to Russia's lack
of success.
Have you seen that as well?
DMITRI ALPEROVITCH: Absolutely.
The morale is very low.
The majority of the fighting force is still
professionals who are getting paid, contractors
in the Russian military.
But we have seen, of course, conscripts being
put into this fight.
And the difference sometimes is really in
the name, because a lot of these conscripts
are sort of forced into signing contracts
once they're trying to get out.
And we're seeing that no one really wants
to fight in Ukraine.
And they're making very little progress as
a result.
AMNA NAWAZ: Dmitri, what about the Ukrainian
response?
As you just heard reported there, they are
getting supplies of more and heavier weaponry
from the U.S. and NATO.
Admiral Kirby said, look, they get it in,
and then the Ukrainians have to figure out
how to move it wherever it needs to go.
Are they able to get that weaponry to the
places they need it?
DMITRI ALPEROVITCH: The logistics are very
challenging.
They're relying on rail.
And the Russians this week have started to
target rail infrastructure.
They targeted a number of substations in Western
Ukraine to try to shut down rail.
They have only been temporarily successful,
caused about two hours of outage in some of
these locations.
So the Ukrainians are still able to resupply.
And that is why you're seeing the Russians
make such a big push in the Donbass so quickly,
before they have been able to really send
all their reinforcements into this fight,
which the doctrine would dictate they should.
And, as a result, they're rushing because
they really want to cut off those supplies
from coming into the Donbass region.
AMNA NAWAZ: Tell me a little bit more about
what's at stake in the Donbass and, of course,
the Mariupol target that they're still trying
to capture there, which would give them a
crucial land bridge connecting those territories
they control.
What's at stake there, beyond just the military
play?
DMITRI ALPEROVITCH: Well, at this point, it's
prestige.
It's the ability to say that we have won this
fight, even though the initial objectives,
of course, of taking Kyiv, changing the government
have not panned out.
But they're trying to say that, never mind,
we didn't want to do that anyway.
This was all about protecting the Russian
population in the Donbass.
And if they can claim that they have been
able to take what were the old boundaries
of Donetsk and Luhansk, at least two statelets
that they have created, if they can say that
they now have the land corridor to Crimea,
they can proclaim victory politically.
President Putin can.
But here's the reality for the Ukrainians.
Even if they manage to hold the Donbass and
prevent the Russians from capturing much of
that territory, the remaining territory, they
still face a very tough situation economically.
The Black Sea is blockaded by the Russians.
That means all the ports that the Ukrainians
have both in the Azov Sea and in the Black
Sea are not functioning.
And that was the majority of their exports,
the vast majority.
Over 135 million tons a year would go through
those ports.
Now they're hoping to get about a million
tons a month through the rail infrastructure
down into Poland and Romania, just about a
10th of what they actually need.
And that's 40 percent of their GDP.
So the Ukrainian economy is really being starved
to death right now by the Russians.
AMNA NAWAZ: And, Dmitri, in just the 30 seconds
or so we have left, do you even know what
victory looks like for Ukrainians at this
point?
DMITRI ALPEROVITCH: Well, obviously, they
have been able to preserve their government,
preserve their freedom, but can they preserve
their economy?
That is the question right now.
They require about $5 billion to $7 billion
in aid a month right now.
The West, of course, is supporting them, but
how long can they go?
Can they go for years?
Can they go for decades?
They need to get that back -- economy back
up and running, their exports back through
the maritime ports.
And if we can't block -- if we can't an break
the blockade that the Russians are instituting
in the Black Sea, it will be very, very tough
to do.
AMNA NAWAZ: That is Dmitri Alperovitch of
the Silverado Policy Accelerator joining us
tonight.
Dmitri, thanks for your time.
DMITRI ALPEROVITCH: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's other news: A
Wall Street rout ended a month marked by its
worst losses in decades.
Worries over inflation and interest rates
drove the sell-off.
The Dow Jones industrial average lost 939
points.
The Nasdaq fell 537.
The S&P 500 gave up 155.
All told, the S&P lost nearly 9 percent in
April.
It's down 13 percent since January, its worst
start to a year since 1939.
The Nasdaq fell 13 percent this month.
That's the most since 2008.
And the Dow lost nearly 5 percent.
A closely watched gauge of inflation underscored
today what U.S. consumers see for themselves.
The Commerce Department reported that prices
jumped 6.6 percent in March compared with
a year ago.
As with other recent inflation measures, that's
the highest in 40 years.
Consumer spending rose just over 1 percent,
due mostly to higher prices.
In China, President Xi Jinping and the Communist
Party's ruling Politburo have reaffirmed a
zero-COVID strategy.
The statement today came amid growing outbreaks
in Beijing and Shanghai.
But officials said the policy is preventing
needless deaths.
LI BIN, Vice Minister, Chinese National Health
Commission (through translator): China is
a country with uneven regional development
and insufficient medical resources.
If the COVID-19 response loosens to let the
virus run free, it will definitely lead to
a huge number of infections in a short period
of time and a large number of severe and mortal
cases.
Medical resources will risk being depleted.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meanwhile, Beijing conducted
a third round of mass testing.
And food had to be delivered through fences
in one blocked-off neighborhood.
A powerful bomb exploded at a mosque in Afghanistan's
capital today.
The leader of the mosque in Kabul said that
at least 50 people were killed.
The Taliban government put the official death
toll at 10.
Taliban officials arrived, and ambulances
evacuated dozens of wounded.
Shaken survivors told of a blast that tore
through worshipers.
MOHAMMAD BASHIR, Survivor (through translator):
A number of Taliban members were inside the
mosque too.
And while we were worshiping and standing
to finish our service, the explosion erupted.
And I was covered with small pieces of victims'
body parts.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This was the latest in a series
of mosque attacks, many of them claimed by
the Islamic State group.
In Israel, there's been more violence at Jerusalem's
Al-Aqsa Mosque compound.
Early today, Palestinian youths started throwing
stones inside the complex.
Israeli police then moved in, firing rubber
bullets.
Palestinian medics said that dozens were wounded.
By midday, calm returned, and Friday prayers
were peaceful, as tens of thousands of Muslims
marked the last Friday of Ramadan.
Back in this country, a federal court in Virginia
sentenced Islamic State member Alexanda Kotey
to life in prison in the murders of four Americans
in Syria in 2014 and 2015.
Kotey's terror cell was known as the Beatles
for their British accents.
Their victims included journalists James Foley
and Steven Sotloff and aid workers Kayla Mueller
and Peter Kassig.
Three of the four were beheaded.
Major League Baseball suspended Los Angeles
Dodgers pitcher Trevor Bauer today for two
seasons.
A San Diego woman alleges that Bauer beat
and sexually abused her.
He denies it.
And Los Angeles prosecutors have said there's
not enough evidence to pursue charges.
Bauer said he will appeal the suspension.
And, in London, former tennis great Boris
Becker was sentenced to 2.5 years in prison
for hiding personal wealth.
The 54-year-old German declared bankruptcy
in 2017.
Later, a British court found that he illicitly
transferred hundreds of thousands of dollars
in assets.
Still to come on the "NewsHour": new polling
data suggests a struggle for Democrats in
the upcoming midterm elections; David Brooks
and Jonathan Capehart break down the week's
political headlines; a new novel imagines
a world in which our memories can be accessed
and reviewed by ourselves and by others; plus
much more.
Anti-Semitic incidents hit a record high last
year in the United States.
William Brangham has more on what is behind
the rise in hate.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Judy, the Anti-Defamation
League, which tracks anti-Semitic behavior
nationwide, found 2,717 incidents in 2021.
That's a 34 percent increase from the year
before.
That averages to more than seven anti-Semitic
incidents per day.
Jonathan Greenblatt is the CEO of the Anti-Defamation
League and author of the recent book "It Could
Happen Here: Why America Is Tipping from Hate
to the Unthinkable and How We Can Stop It."
Jonathan Greenblatt, good to have you back
on the "NewsHour."
This report documents the most anti-Semitic
attacks in the U.S. since the ADL started
recording these events back in the 1970s.
Can you help us understand, how should we
interpret what you have found?
JONATHAN GREENBLATT, CEO and National Director,
Anti-Defamation League: Well, I think the
data, unfortunately, speaks for itself in
some ways.
As you pointed out, this is the highest total
we have ever tracked in more than 40 years
of doing this work.
And we should keep in mind that anti-Semitic
acts were going down in the United States
for almost 15 years, and then ,in 2016, they
started to move up.
And we're now at the point where we have nearly
triple the number of incidents today that
we did in 2015.
I mean, in the past year alone, assaults increased
167 percent.
And we saw examples of vandalism on the rise,
harassment on the rise.
So I think anti-Semitism really isn't just,
I would suggest, a Jewish problem.
It's an American problem.
It's typically the canary in the coal mine.
And so, as things are beginning to unravel
more broadly, the Jewish community is often
the target of scapegoating and victimized
in that way.
And that's exactly what's happening here.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Your report points out a
timeline coincidence, that a lot of these
attacks really surged right around the 2021
violence between Israel and Hamas in Gaza.
And, similarly, as you're mentioning, there
were also a similar number of attacks with
-- on Arab-Americans and Muslim-Americans.
Why do you think those events were such a
trigger?
JONATHAN GREENBLATT: I can't speak to the
number of attacks on Arab-Americans during
that time.
I'm not really aware.
But I can tell you -- or Muslim-Americans.
But I can tell you specifically that, in the
period of May, during the conflict, we saw
nearly 150 percent increase of anti-Semitic
acts over the same period of time in 2020.
Now, I will be honest.
You often see, with incidents in the Middle
East or conflict, things can be triggered
here at home.
But we have never seen a situation like this
before.
You had Jews being beaten and brutalized in
broad daylight, say, in the middle of Times
Square or Los Angeles or the Strip in Las
Vegas, where people who were simply identified
as Jewish came under assault and attack.
That was new.
And I think what you're seeing is a kind of
normalization of anti-Semitism and extremism.
And to put this in some degree of context,
we know, for example, that when we saw elected
officials and people in positions of authority
after the outbreak of COVID denigrating China,
attacking its policies, making wild claims
about their intentionality of the regime in
Beijing to spreading COVID around the world,
we saw attacks on Asian Americans here at
home.
By the same token, when you have people make
wild claims about the Jewish state, make unhinged
accusations, maybe it shouldn't surprise us
that then people attack Jewish Americans here
at home.
So I think we need people in positions of
authority to kind of dial down the rhetoric,
to realize that words have consequences, and
to be a bit more responsible.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Addressing hatred in any
one individual is obviously a very difficult
thing to do.
You talked about lowering the temperature.
But are there other things that people of
goodwill, that social media companies, that
other policymakers could do to reduce this
hatred and bigotry?
JONATHAN GREENBLATT: Certainly, there are
things that can be done.
So, number one, I think individuals should
be -- feel empowered to interrupt intolerance
when it happens.
Call out hate when you hear it, whether it's
directed at Jewish people or, by the way,
anyone else.
And, in our polarized society, we often don't
want to -- we point to the other side.
But we need to call it out when it happens
among our own, conservatives calling it out
when conservatives do it, liberals calling
it out when liberals do it.
That's really important.
I think the social media companies could play
a huge role.
Their algorithms don't need to amplify intolerance
and anti-Semitism.
Just a little bit more discretion by the companies
could dial down the drama dramatically.
And then, finally, I'd like to see policymakers
bring anti-bias education into classrooms,
bring communities together.
There's a lot more that could be done.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right, Jonathan Greenblatt
of the Anti-Defamation League, thank you so
much for being here.
JONATHAN GREENBLATT: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thirty years ago today, parts
of Los Angeles erupted in unrest after a jury
acquitted four white Los Angeles police officers
over the videotaped beating of Rodney King,
a Black motorist.
On this anniversary, Stephanie Sy revisits
the fallout from the Rodney King beating and
examines what has and has not changed.
STEPHANIE SY: For many longtime Angelenos,
the sights and smells of April 29, 1992, are
still easily conjured.
Smoke spread across L.A. as buildings were
set on fire.
Images of looting filled television screens,
and less visible, the hurt expressed through
peaceful protest.
RHONDA MITCHELL, Former 911 Operator: You
hear the verdicts, and you hear the one not
guilty after another.
I was angry.
There's no other way for me to say it.
I was just furious at the justice system.
DARNELL HUNT, Dean of Social Services, UCLA:
When people had expected some type of justice,
when it did not happen, it was like another
blow.
It was like Black lives don't really matter.
CONNIE RICE, Civil Rights Attorney: I picked
up the phone, and I told my staff: Go get
your kids, go home, don't leave your houses.
The city is going to blow."
STEPHANIE SY: South Los Angeles, where much
of the unrest unfolded, had been home to the
city's largest Black population for decades.
Rhonda Mitchell's family, like many, had settled
in L.A.'s Crenshaw district after leaving
the South during the Great Migration.
RHONDA MITCHELL: It was just the place to
be.
Crenshaw was alive.
It crackled.
STEPHANIE SY: But, in many parts of L.A.,
tensions between communities of color and
the LAPD had been simmering since the last
bout of unrest in 1965.
Mitchell's father, who lived through the Watts
uprising, worried history was repeating itself
after the Rodney King verdict came down.
RHONDA MITCHELL: During the riots, I called
him and I asked him how he was doing.
And he was weary.
He was sad about what was going on in the
neighborhood.
CONNIE RICE: There was a lot of pressure and
a lot of kindling, and it just took one spark.
STEPHANIE SY: Connie Rice was an attorney
for the NAACP's Legal Defense Fund at the
time.
CONNIE RICE: African Americans were furious
at LAPD for the humiliation, for the gratuitously
cruel policing, for the constant harassment.
STEPHANIE SY: For nearly a week after the
acquittals, long frustrated Angelenos took
to the streets.
Nearly 10,000 military troops were deployed
to restore order.
By the end, more than 50 people were dead.
Police made over 10,000 arrests, and people
had burned and vandalized $1 billion worth
of property.
DARNELL HUNT: It's like Martin Luther King
said a long time ago these types of events
are the voice of the voiceless.
STEPHANIE SY: Darnell Hunt is the dean of
social sciences at UCLA.
In 1992, he was a graduate student and a budding
social scientist observing and documenting
the events.
DARNELL HUNT: I had my camcorder, and I was
walking around town trying to get a sense
of what was happening and how it compared
to what I was seeing on television news.
And I ran into this old man, who just gestured
me over, and he pointed to a store over here.
And he said: "See that?
That's my record store.
And I would sacrifice that in order to make
sure that our voices are heard."
STEPHANIE SY: But some people would hear that,
and they would say, but these were their businesses.
DARNELL HUNT: Yes.
STEPHANIE SY: This was their community.
DARNELL HUNT: Well, obviously, for him, he
had lived his whole life as a Black man.
He had experienced what injustice can be.
And he was willing to make that sacrifice
STEPHANIE SY: Media coverage of the time focused
on the looting, the burning and violence,
without much context for the socioeconomic
disparities and police treatment of people
of color in Los Angeles that had been fomenting
resentment since the 1960s.
On that front, progress has been mixed.
Most news reporters didn't capture the nuance,
says Hunt, who's written books about media
and race.
DARNELL HUNT: Overlooking the underlying causes,
the structural causes that -- like inequality,
racism, racial profiling, economic insecurity,
lack of employment, disinvestment in inner
cities, all the things that created stress
that led to the explosion that was triggered
by the Rodney King beating verdicts.
STEPHANIE SY: Rhonda Mitchell was a 911 operator
for the LAPD at the time and witnessed the
chaos erupting through the emergency phone
lines.
RHONDA MITCHELL: We were not answering calls
unless it was really about life and death.
STEPHANIE SY: She had taken the job for the
pay and security, but, in the aftermath of
the verdict, her loyalties were divided.
RHONDA MITCHELL: It was a struggle to work
for the police department and hear what went
on and know and hear the derogatory remarks
about people of color.
STEPHANIE SY: You would hear racist comments?
RHONDA MITCHELL: Yes.
And that's where it gets a little muddled
for me, because we want the police in our
community.
We want our community safe.
We don't want drug dealers all over the place.
But the police didn't know how to interact
with us.
The trust had already been lost there between
us and the police.
STEPHANIE SY: The problems at the LAPD were
partly addressed with diversity recruitment.
The force is now majority people of color.
But police killings of Black and brown Angelenos
are still often in the headlines, and accountability
is rare.
Thirty years later, Connie Rice is still trying
to help reform the police.
She partnered with the LAPD to help create
the Community Safety Partnership, with a holistic
approach to working in neighborhoods where
mistrust still runs deep.
CONNIE RICE: The transition has to be from
search and destroy, mass incarceration, shock
and awe policing, to wraparound safety, heal
and build, guardian policing.
Gladiator to guardian, that's the culture
change.
But you can't have that change without all
of the other sectors changing too, civil rights
lawyers, the residents, government agencies.
We ask cops to do too much.
STEPHANIE SY: Rice says she has found like-minded
police chiefs with the same goals, but that
the message hasn't trickled down to the rank
and file.
CONNIE RICE: If you stick people in a hellhole,
and you send cops into make sure that what's
in that ghetto stays there, you're going to
get what we get, which is riots, rebellions,
uprisings that are triggered by a bad shooting,
a bad stop.
We're one more video away from that kind of
explosion again.
STEPHANIE SY: Really?
You think it is still possible?
CONNIE RICE: I'm afraid it's going to devolve
again to a level of frustration because there
isn't enough change.
The political momentum has slowed.
The federal legislation stalled.
So, while you have seen a huge change in the
culture and the Black Lives Matter movement
has gone global, but it hasn't touched the
DNA of American policing.
STEPHANIE SY: Have the underlying problems
that existed 30 years ago in South Los Angeles
been addressed?
DARNELL HUNT: I mean, all the basic measures
of economic well-being across the different
racial and ethnic groups, there's been very,
very little progress since 1992.
And, in some cases, we have gone backwards.
STEPHANIE SY: So, 1992 really did change your
perspective?
RHONDA MITCHELL: Oh, 1992 changed everything
for me.
South L.A. could feel like cocoon, as I went
to the same shops.
Those shops didn't exist anymore after 1992.
The world...
STEPHANIE SY: They were burned down.
RHONDA MITCHELL: They were burned down.
The world wasn't like it used to be in 1992.
It changed.
It shifted.
And I have kept -- that shift has stayed with
me since that time, so that's why I wear this
necklace.
STEPHANIE SY: In Rhonda's old neighborhood
in South L.A., a new metro line is being built,
the center of a multimillion-dollar revitalization
project that aims to bring opportunity, while
celebrating the legacy of Black L.A., a legacy
of creativity, strength, and continuing struggle.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Stephanie Sy in
Los Angeles.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A new "PBS NewsHour"/NPR/Marist
poll is out today, and it has good news for
Republicans, but indicates a rocky road ahead
for President Biden and Democrats, as the
midterm election season swings into gear.
To help us break it all down, I'm joined by
our political correspondent, Lisa Desjardins.
Lisa, so, hello.
First of all, what is in here about how President
Biden is doing?
LISA DESJARDINS: First of all, I like to tell
people right off the top there is a margin
of error here.
It's about 3 or 4 percentage points, depending
on the category.
Let's look at the president's approval rating
over time, where we are over the past few
months.
You see.
There it was.
It got lower last -- in March.
It has increased a little bit, 41 percent.
But given that margin of error I just talked
about, it's about static.
It hasn't really changed that much.
Now, it is technically higher than the approval
rating at the lowest point for President Trump.
But that's not a comparison that Democrats
want, of course.
Some good news for Democrats maybe that, at
this point in his term of office, President
Reagan also had a low approval rating, about
46 percent.
So this doesn't indicate the fate of a president.
However, it is a problem for Democrats, of
course, on the ballot in November.
And I want to drill down into something specific
that may alarm them.
Let's look at their base a little bit.
When you asked if people that we have surveyed
if they strongly approve of President Biden,
let's look at what people said.
Who strongly approves?
Only 43 percent of Democrats strongly approve
of the president.
That's the base that you want to get out.
Three percent of Republicans, no surprise,
not a lot of strong approval there.
But look at independents.
Only 9 percent of independents strongly approve
of President Biden.
That is a big enthusiasm problem for Democrats
that they have to really think about.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, you're talking about Democrats
broadly.
And you did look more closely at that.
What does this suggest that Democrats need
to think about for November?
LISA DESJARDINS: There are some very significant
issues in which Democrats see a larger gap
forming between them and Democrat -- and Republicans
in public opinion.
Let's take a look at this by the issues then.
So the number one issue right now seems to
be the economy, of course.
So, when you look at the economy there, right
there on the first on the left, the blue line
indicates people who believe Democrats would
do better with the economy.
The red line, that much larger line, Republicans,
people who believe Republicans would do better
with the economy.
But we also heard from -- we also saw in this
survey that most Americans believe -- more
Americans, rather, believe that Republicans
would do better on crime.
Look at that immigration figure.
By just a narrow amount, more Americans now
believe that Republicans would do a better
job handling immigration than Democrats.
That is an issue that Democrats in the past
have done well with.
Where do Democrats do well?
Look at that.
On the coronavirus, more Americans believe
Democrats would do better on that than on
-- than Republicans do.
Those are really major issues right now.
And Democrats are falling behind.
And the Democrats still do well with things
like climate change.
They blow Republicans out of the water on
that.
But talking to our pollster Lee Miringoff
on this, he said it's a real problem, because
the front-of-mind issues is where Democrats
are losing ground.
LEE MIRINGOFF, Director, Marist Institute
for Public Opinion: Right now, the issues
of greatest salience for the voters are the
issues that tend to be favoring the Republicans.
And that is sort of also driving these general
numbers about why the Republicans are in decent
shape.
One big caveat in all that is that we really
don't know right now what's going to be on
people's minds in October and November.
What we clearly have learned in the last year
or so is that the issues come and go in very
fast fashion right now.
LISA DESJARDINS: One issue he mentioned, abortion
and the Supreme Court decision that we expect
soon.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Lisa, there's another
issue that Republicans have spent a fair amount
of time emphasizing this year.
It's education.
And yet Democrats seem to do well with that.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
And there's something really interesting when
you look down at sort of how -- what people
feel on education.
Let's take a look at the data that we found.
You ask all voters who does a better job on
education, overall, more Americans believe
Democrats, that blue line, 40 percent, would
do better on education.
But if you ask parents who have children under
the age of 18, people who are in schools,
in PTAs, they believe Republicans by a narrow
amount would do a better job.
And that's why you're seeing this problem
at school boards and meetings across the country.
Those parents are starting to trust Republicans
more than Democrats, though it's close.
And that is a real issue.
JUDY WOODRUFF: No doubt or connection to COVID
there.
And, Lisa, you all -- also looked at some
particular voter groups, including Latinos.
What did you find?
LISA DESJARDINS: You know, we have seen in
many cycles that this is a voting group that
really does -- has not really chosen Republicans,
Democrats.
And, of course, Latinos aren't monolithic,
many different groups in many different parts
of the country.
But I want to look at where Latinos have been
in the past few years in terms of big surveys.
This is where the percent of Latinos who told
exit holder's in 2020 that they voted for
President Biden, 65 percent.
That's a number of Democrats like.
They would love it to be even higher.
But, in our survey, this is the percent that
said they would support a Democrat in November,
39 percent, 52 percent voting Republican.
And that is a huge issue in some states with
some close elections like Texas and large
Latino populations.
It is a population that, when I talk to Latino
leaders on the Hill and otherwise, they feel
Democrats have not done enough to reach out.
And perhaps that's what we're seeing in this
poll.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It would be really interesting
to understand what issues matter most to Latino
voters.
LISA DESJARDINS: Yes.
We will have more polls ahead.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Lisa Desjardins thank you.
LISA DESJARDINS: You're welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As you just heard, our "PBS
NewsHour"/NPR/Marist poll gives us some insights
into what voters are thinking right now.
Plus, the president has asked Congress for
a big increase in assistance to Ukraine.
And the GOP is brushing aside audiotapes that
captured party leaders criticizing their own.
We turn now to the analysis of Brooks and
Capehart.
That's New York Times columnist David Brooks,
and Jonathan Capehart, associate editor for
The Washington Post.
And it is great to see the two of you on this
Friday night.
Thank you for being here.
Let's just pick up right now, David, with
that poll, really interesting analysis by
Lisa.
What did you see there?
What stood out to you?
DAVID BROOKS: The two things Lisa mentioned
really leapt out of me, first, the Latino
vote, 52 percent favoring Republicans, 55
percent Latino disapproval of Joe Biden.
These are -- this should be four alarm bells
for Democrats.
Latinos have been -- have not been shifting
over to the Republicans.
They have done -- Donald Trump had done reasonably
well with Latinos.
But the Latino still identify overwhelmingly
with Democrats.
But they're clearly not happy with the way
things are going.
And then the second issue is education.
If you go back -- Pew Research Center does
these polls constantly, which party do you
trust more on education?
And if you go back over the decades, Democrats
usually have a 20-point advantage, a 26-point
advantage, something pretty big.
And that's down to 20 -- or that's now down
to basically zero.
And so I think that's partly the schools closing
at the teachers union behest.
It's partly some efforts to get rid of the
magnet schools and gifted programs.
And I think it's partly a sense that too many
progressives are trying to do everything with
education in the schools.
But, clearly, on those issues, it's helping
Republicans, especially those with kids.
And so this is, across the board, pretty grim
for Democrats.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you look at these numbers,
Jonathan?
(LAUGHTER)
JONATHAN CAPEHART: So, David was paying attention
to the Latino numbers.
I went to the African American numbers, because
the African American vote is the base of the
Democratic Party.
It is the base of President Biden.
That's why he's president.
And yet his standing among Black voters, his
approval rating is 64 percent.
That should raise alarm bells in the White
House, if it hasn't already.
I think it's because of no movement on voting
rights, no movement on criminal justice reform.
We will see what happens.
As Lee Miringoff said, who knows what people
will care about in October, but I bet -- maybe
the president will get a bump up when Justice
Ketanji Brown Jackson officially takes the
oath of office to be the next justice in the
Supreme Court.
And, then to mimic David, there's a second
thing that leapt out at me, the inflation
numbers, the crime numbers, and the national
security numbers all not in the Democratic
Party's favor.
Those, particularly inflation and crime, are
-- quote, unquote -- "emotional issues."
People -- people go to the ballot box....
JUDY WOODRUFF: Your earpiece...
(LAUGHTER)
JONATHAN CAPEHART: My earpiece just fell out,
everyone.
But if the administration can't talk to the
American people convincingly that they have
crime under control and inflation under control,
they will be in trouble.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David, are these the kinds
of things that Democrats have the ability
over the next six, seven, eight months to
change voters' thinking, or are these issues
that are essentially just entrenched right
now?
DAVID BROOKS: Not entrenched, but super hard
to change this around.
Basically, the whole zeitgeist of the country
has deteriorated over the last year.
And I would say it's been a threat of disorder,
disorder on many fronts, disorder internationally
with Ukraine, disorder at home, crime.
Crime in New York is surging by 30 percent
year over year, 30, 40 in some -- robbery
and burglary up to 40 or 50 percent.
Inflation is a form of economic disorder.
And so people just feel that the world has
become less safe on a whole variety of fronts.
And, traditionally, Republicans have been
the party of order, and Democrats have been
the party of fairness and justice.
And so there has been historically an attempt
to turn to Republicans when you feel unsafe.
And so Democrats have to turn that around.
Now, they have turned it around in the past.
In the 1990s, Tony Blair and Bill Clinton
-- Tony Blair had a phrase tough on crime
and tough on the causes of crime.
And that was an attempt to create an anti-crime
strategy, say, for those in the center-left.
And so it can be done.
But it's a heavy lift.
And it takes a lot of time and a lot of persuasion.
I'm not sure there's enough time to do it
before the midterms.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What do you see here?
Do you see there's a chance on any -- well,
you -- and you were talking about among Black
voters.
But where's the opportunity for Democrats
here?
JONATHAN CAPEHART: Well, I think the opportunity
comes in another set of numbers that I looked
at, and the poll points out Trump's approval
rating.
And Donald Trump's approval rating is at 39
percent.
His disapproval is at 56 percent, not unsimilar,
dissimilar to President Biden's.
But if you are a Democrat running against
candidates that have been endorsed by Donald
Trump or who haven't run away from Donald
Trump, that gives you something to run on,
because, in the end, those candidates only
have their fealty to Trump to run on, whereas
the Democrats have something to actually talk
about, about what they want to do, real plans.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
You -- and you mentioned...
(CROSSTALK)
DAVID BROOKS: Can I disagree with Jonathan
just on...
(CROSSTALK)
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sure.
Sure.
DAVID BROOKS: Because I think running against
Donald Trump is a gigantic mistake.
I think that's what we saw in the Glenn Youngkin-Terry
McAuliffe race in Virginia.
I think people are really -- are really struggling
with issues right in front of their face,
the gas prices, and things that are incredibly
close to home.
And I just don't think there's been that much
evidence that running against Donald Trump
is super effective at getting those voters
who are willing to swing back and forth.
JONATHAN CAPEHART: But that's what I -- but
that's what I was talking about -- talking
about, David, that if a Democrat is running
against a Trumper, that Democrat will be able
to talk about those issues that you're talking
about, what they want to do about inflation,
what they want to do about jobs, what they
want to do about crime, whereas the other
candidate might be talking about all sorts
of other things that those voters don't care
about.
JUDY WOODRUFF: OK.
All right.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: We move it to...
DAVID BROOKS: We have achieved clarity.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: But one -- it was interesting.
One of you mentioned national security.
And, David, I want to come back to you on
this, because, at this point, on Ukraine,
which is in the news every single night -- we're
watching that terrible war grind on -- the
Republicans do seem to be, in January -- yes,
they say President Biden should have moved
sooner, but they do seem to be on board with
approving the money, additional aid, military,
economic and humanitarian, he's asking for
Ukraine.
But we don't see any of that working to the
president's benefit.
Is that -- is that how you see it?
DAVID BROOKS: It's really stunning to me that
if you get a 49 disapproval on a bipartisan
policy that's extremely popular.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes.
DAVID BROOKS: And it just shows the bad mood
the country is in.
And so, this week, the president -- I think
we -- it's grim news for the president, but
he's done a fantastic job, especially this
week, on Ukraine.
This aid package that he outlined is super
aggressive.
It's big.
And it's what Ukraine needs.
The war is changing as it moves to the east.
There's less sort of maneuverability for the
Ukrainian.
And so that's much more wide open spaces,
and the Russian tanks are going to be more
effective.
They're closer to their supply lines.
And so Ukraine just needs a lot more heavy
equipment, including tanks and things like
that.
And Biden has risen -- with some long-range
artillery and things like, the Biden administration
has really risen to the occasion.
And so I would say to him, this is not a moment
to think about how this is polling.
This is a moment to do what's right for the
world.
And, as far as I can tell, he's doing that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you see this aid package
and what the prospects are for getting bipartisan
support for it?
JONATHAN CAPEHART: Well, I mean, I agree 100
percent with David in his assessment of the
president's leadership here.
And I also think that Congress will remain
on board and will pass these budget requests
from the president.
The question I have, and I know the question
that is being pondered in the White House,
is, how long is this going to last?
What is the appetite of the American people
to see, every couple of weeks, multibillion-dollar
packages going -- going overseas, when there
are domestic issues and domestic priorities
that aren't being addressed so quickly, i.e,
say, lots of people care about student debt?
Lots of people want to know, where's the child
tax credit?
There are lots of things that could be -- that
could be funded.
But the president has made it very clear,
the administration has made it very clear
that the war -- Russia's war on Ukraine isn't
just an invasion of one country of over another.
It is democracy vs. autocracy.
And that is -- and that is what's guiding
the president.
And I agree with David.
The president doesn't care about his legacy,
about how this polls.
This is an existential threat that's taking
place on the European continent.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it is interesting, as we
said, that he doesn't seem to be getting any
credit from the public for what he's doing.
JONATHAN CAPEHART: Right, not right now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David -- excuse me -- I do
want to come back to this question of aid
for Ukraine.
I mean, to Jonathan's point, it's, what, $33
billion this time.
It was several billion the month before that
and the month before that.
This war looks like it's going to go on for
a long time.
Is there a limit to what Americans are going
to be prepared to do for Ukraine?
DAVID BROOKS: So far, we haven't seen any
evidence of it.
If anything, the taste for action seems to
be growing.
I mean, if you look over at Europe, they're
really willing to cut off energy supplies
from Russia.
That, I would never have expected.
And so, if there's any momentum here in the
Western alliance's willingness to sacrifice
for this, it seems to be increasing, not decreasing.
And one thing COVID did, we got used to $1.9
trillion bills.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: So, a $35 billion bill doesn't
seem that big anymore.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: You are right, putting it in
perspective.
But just in the last few minutes we have,
I want to come back, Jonathan, to something
that it first surfaced last week, but, this
week, more audiotapes from the House Republican
leader, Kevin McCarthy.
And the ones that emerged this week have him
expressing real concern about some of the
far right members of the House Republican
Caucus, and the effect that they -- that what
they were saying and doing could lead to even
terrible things happening.
This was after January the 6th.
Here we are all these months later.
Kevin McCarthy brushes it off.
Do we just forget it?
I mean, is it -- what does it all add up to?
JONATHAN CAPEHART: Well, look, we can't forget
it.
We need to listen to Kevin McCarthy in real
time being a true leader, expressing the horror
over what happened, the danger that it posed
to the country.
And then contrast that to where he is today,
which is the complete opposite.
And what it says to me is that the Republican
Party, the Republican Caucus in the House,
and the House minority leader are willing
to lie about what they have -- what they have
done and what they have said, all for the
purpose of winning back the majority in the
midterms.
And that leads to an even bigger question
for me, which is, if the House minority leader
is willing to lie, when we can read the words
and hear the words with our own ears, then
what does a Speaker McCarthy do?
How can the American people trust what he
says?
How can the American press that has to cover
him, how do we trust what he says?
That is the bigger problem for the Republican
Party.
But then it could also be a bigger problem
for the country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you answer some of those
questions, David?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, first, when I started
doing this job, and I would interview people,
and people would flat-out lie to me, or even
lie about interviews I had done, I was sort
of shocked.
And now I'm a little more used to it.
It's something that gets done here.
There is lying in Washington.
Kevin McCarthy is a nice guy, an affable guy.
He doesn't particularly have convictions.
And so he just has blown with the wind.
And that, he's been consistent upon.
I think what's interesting is, is there a
scandal?
It's only a scandal if Donald Trump says it's
a scandal.
And Donald Trump has decided, intelligently,
it's not a scandal.
It shows how much power he has.
And he has basically -- and he now holds -- he
now owns Kevin McCarthy, because he's got
something on him.
And so this has been a very good maneuver
for Donald Trump.
JUDY WOODRUFF: With that, we're going to thank
the both of you.
David Brooks, Jonathan Capehart, thank you.
JONATHAN CAPEHART: Thanks, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A new novel imagines a world
in which our memories can be accessed and
reviewed by ourselves and by others.
Jeffrey Brown talks to Pulitzer Prize-winning
author Jennifer Egan at her home in Brooklyn
about her latest work of fiction.
It's part of our arts and culture series,
Canvas.
JEFFREY BROWN: Imagine a beautiful cube in
which you can store all your memories, allowing
access to them whenever you want.
Call it own your unconscious.
But there is a tradeoff.
Others can access it, or, in a sense, you.
Novelist Jennifer Egan has dreamed up this
so far nonexistent technology.
She may still write by hand in the office
of her Brooklyn home.
but, like most of us, she finds much of her
own life bound up in the digital world.
JENNIFER EGAN, Author, "The Candy House":
I feel like that's the great story I have
witnessed in my lifetime.
You know, the speed of change in the telecommunication
realm, the media realm is so fast that I feel
like I continually revisit the question of
how that affects us internally.
JEFFREY BROWN: And why does that interest
you as a novelist?
JENNIFER EGAN: Because the novel is the instrument
to examine inside people's minds.
I mean, that's -- as far as I can see, that's
the unique thing that novels do that nothing
else can do.
JEFFREY BROWN: Egan's new novel, "The Candy
House," looks into her characters' minds and
also plays with literary forms, something
she has done in six previous works, each different
from the last.
The new one draws on characters and storylines
from her 2010 Pulitzer Prize-winning "A Visit
from the Goon Squad."
And each chapter is written in a different
voice or perspective and uses different styles,
including an e-mail exchange and a futuristic
spy story.
JENNIFER EGAN: In a way, what the book does
is simulate this experience of being in a
collective consciousness and moving in and
out of world's and people's minds.
Imagine...
JEFFREY BROWN: A fragmented world, yes.
JENNIFER EGAN: Right, or a fragmented experience,
which is very much what online experience
often is.
Imagine trying to tell that story conventionally.
My last novel was a historical novel.
I told it in a very straightforward way.
It couldn't have lived in a form like this.
But one way to keep things fresh and to keep
myself doing things I haven't done before
is to try to use new ways of doing them, because
that will require that I tell a story I have
never told.
I just love being near the water.
JEFFREY BROWN: On one of her favorite walks
along the East River, she said that, while
ideas get her going, it's the characters who
take over, beginning in this case with Bix,
a world-famous social media entrepreneur,
dreaming up the next big thing.
Chapter by chapter, we meet others embracing
or alienated by this new world.
Are you a techie yourself?
I mean, is this your world?
JENNIFER EGAN: No.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: No?
JENNIFER EGAN: I'm a late and incompetent
adopter.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
JENNIFER EGAN: I'm...
JEFFREY BROWN: But, somehow, that made you
want to explore it in a way?
JENNIFER EGAN: Well, I'm interested in it
because it interests other people.
You know, anything that impacts the way people
live and think is so fascinating to me, and
especially something new, because I'm interested
in change.
I mean, in a way, that's what fiction is all
about, sort of watching things change over
some unit of time.
JEFFREY BROWN: George Orwell's "1984," she
thinks, got it half right.
Screens are everywhere in our lives, but we
invite them in.
Are you afraid that we're losing our sense
of privacy and our sense of authenticity?
JENNIFER EGAN: You know, I have various thoughts
about it as a civilian.
But what I feel, as a fiction writer, is just
total curiosity.
I don't know what -- really what the implications
of all of this are.
And I think any thought I have has to be put
in the context of my age and my generation.
My children will tell you I'm anti-screen
and deprive them of important cultural experiences
by not letting them play enough video games.
(LAUGHTER)
JENNIFER EGAN: But the truth is, I don't know.
I feel a kind of dread as a human that I hope
doesn't seep too much into my fiction, because,
in a way, it's inappropriate.
And, as a fiction writer, my job is to transcend
that and just enter the realm of human experience
without judgments.
For me, fiction is where I ask questions and
where I go to ask questions as a reader.
JEFFREY BROWN: I can't help think that all
these things we're talking about, the themes
you're addressing, the experimentation with
form, they're all kind of tied to larger questions
of literary fiction today.
Like, what's it for, right?
How relevant is it?
Who's it for?
JENNIFER EGAN: To me, the reason fiction still
exists is that it is still relevant, because
we do have a curiosity to be inside the minds
of other people, one of the things that we
can never actually do in real life.
It won't happen.
JEFFREY BROWN: So far.
(LAUGHTER)
JENNIFER EGAN: Because I made up the machine.
JENNIFER EGAN: We don't understand the brain
well enough to actually do it.
But there is one slight problem, which is
that we are so image-fixated as a culture
now, and the screens reinforce that every
moment.
And we are so used to skidding around and
not focusing that long on any one thing, that
the muscles that are required to actually
read a book can feel a little flabby.
I just want to keep people -- keep people's
imaginations strong and nimble enough to have
those experiences.
JEFFREY BROWN: So you're worried a bit, but
you're a true believer in fiction's power.
JENNIFER EGAN: I'm a true believer in fiction's
ability to offer something in the form of
entertainment that nothing else is quite doing.
So, yes, I think it is still relevant.
And I hope people will keep reading it.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, the book is "The
Candy House."
Jennifer Egan, thank you very much.
JENNIFER EGAN: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Got to keep up those reading
muscles.
And that is the "NewsHour" for tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Please stay safe, and we will see you soon.